.\" Manpage for senbonzakura.
.TH SENBONZAKURA 1 "2026-07-14" "senbonzakura 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
senbonzakura \- multi-direction refusal abliteration for transformer language models
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B senbonzakura
.RB [ \-\-model
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-out
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-track
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-trials
.IR N ]
.RB [ \-\-max\-directions
.IR K ]
.RB [ \-\-search
.IR pareto | scalar ]
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B senbonzakura kageyoshi
.RB [ \-\-model
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-out
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-track
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-device
.IR cuda | cpu ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B senbonzakura
removes the refusal behaviour from an open weight language model by finding the
.I directions
in its activation space that carry "I can't help with that" and orthogonalising
them out of the residual writing weights. It builds on the single direction method
of Arditi et al. and the automated search of Heretic, and adds multi-direction
ablation: refusal is not one blade, it is a small subspace, and cutting several
directions at once removes the stubborn residual without wrecking coherence.
.PP
The method has three stages. First, per layer refusal directions are extracted:
the good orthogonalised difference of means, plus secondary axes from the PCA of
the harmful residual cloud, giving an orthonormal basis of the refusal subspace.
Second, an Optuna search (NSGA\-II by default) explores a windowed, per component,
multi\-directional ablation and scores each candidate by applying the real,
norm preserving weight bake, so the search optimises the exact model it will save.
The search minimises three objectives at once: strict non\-compliance (hard refusal
plus hedging), the Heretic keyword rate, and KL divergence from the original model
on harmless prompts (the coherence guard). Third, the winning configuration is
baked permanently into the weights and saved.
.SH BANKAI MODE
.TP
.B senbonzakura kageyoshi
Ultimate balanced\-effort abliteration with no manual tuning. It detects the
architecture (dense, fused MoE, or expert list) and parameter count, scales the
search budget to the model's size, and enables every quality lever: the three
objective NSGA\-II front with knee selection, the multi\-direction refusal subspace,
the larger\-eval knee re\-score, and early stop. If a
.I hedge_ds
directory is present in the track directory, the hedging contrast direction is
folded in automatically. The mode is deliberately balanced, it selects the most
uncensored configuration that remains coherent (guarded by the KL ceiling and the
coherence penalty), not the most aggressive one. Only the path and device flags are
honoured; the search budget flags are managed internally and ignored in this mode.
.SH KEY OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-model " DIR"
Path to the base model to abliterate.
.TP
.BI \-\-out " DIR"
Where to write the abliterated model and
.IR abliteration.json .
.TP
.BI \-\-track " DIR"
Directory holding the datasets:
.IR bad_ds ", " good_ds ", " bad_eval_ds .
.TP
.BI \-\-trials " N"
Number of Optuna search trials (default 60).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-directions " K"
Upper bound on refusal directions ablated per layer. 1 is the original single
direction method; greater than 1 enables the multi\-direction subspace ablation.
.TP
.BI \-\-search " pareto|scalar"
.B pareto
maps the whole frontier with NSGA\-II and picks the knee afterwards;
.B scalar
uses a single weighted objective with TPE.
.TP
.BI \-\-kl\-scale " F"
Weight on KL in the scalar objective. Higher protects quality harder.
.TP
.B \-\-per\-component
Tune attention o_proj and MLP down_proj separately (the default). The MLP profile
may fall to zero, leaving the MLP untouched, which often preserves intelligence.
.TP
.B \-\-mlp\-off
Attention only: pin the MLP ablation to zero and drop its search dimensions. Tests
the "attention carries refusal, MLP carries capability" hypothesis.
.TP
.BI \-\-hedge\-ds " DIR"
A hedged compliance dataset (moralising but complying answers). When given, a
hedged versus clean contrast direction is folded into the ablated basis, so the
search can strip the disclaimer axis the difference of means direction misses.
.TP
.BI \-\-patience " N"
Stop the search early once no trial improves the best score for N consecutive
trials (0 runs all trials).
.TP
.BI \-\-eval\-refusal\-final " N"
Re\-score the top frontier candidates on N bad\-eval prompts before picking the
knee, so the choice is not overfit to the small search eval.
.TP
.BI \-\-inspect " LAYER STRENGTH"
Print real harmful and harmless generations at one (layer, strength), before and
after ablation, then exit. Use it to see whether high KL means "wrecked" or just
"a few benign first tokens flipped".
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Bankai, the no\-tuning best effort (recommended):
.PP
.RS
.nf
senbonzakura kageyoshi \-\-model ./base \-\-track ./ds \-\-out ./abliterated
.fi
.RE
.PP
A multi\-direction Pareto search, 200 trials, with the larger knee re\-score:
.PP
.RS
.nf
senbonzakura \-\-model ./base \-\-track ./ds \-\-out ./abliterated \\
    \-\-search pareto \-\-max\-directions 6 \-\-trials 200 \\
    \-\-eval\-refusal\-final 256 \-\-patience 40
.fi
.RE
.PP
Attention only ablation with a hedged contrast:
.PP
.RS
.nf
senbonzakura \-\-model ./base \-\-track ./ds \-\-out ./att \\
    \-\-mlp\-off \-\-hedge\-ds ./ds/hedged_ds \-\-max\-directions 4
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success, or a clean early exit from
.BR \-\-inspect / \-\-bench\-only .
.SH SEE ALSO
Arditi et al., "Refusal in Language Models Is Mediated by a Single Direction"
(2024). Heretic (p\-e\-w/heretic).
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel Iwugo.
